Title: Personalized Digital Semantic Communication for Image Transmission with Vision-Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.14260v1

Published Time: Mon, 17 Aug 2026 00:46:48 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# Personalized Digital Semantic Communication for Image Transmission with Vision-Language Models 

Nan Li, Li Zhou, Haijun Wang, Jun Xiong, Haitao Zhao, Jibo Wei 

College of Electronic Science, National University of Defense Technology, China Email: {li.nan, zhouli2035, haijunwang14, xj8765, haitaozhao, wjbhw }@nudt.edu.cn 

Abstract —Semantic communication (SC) enables bandwidth-efficient wireless image transmission, but most existing SC schemes are user-agnostic and ignore receiver-dependent seman-tics. To address this issue, we propose a personalized digital semantic communication (PDSC) framework that integrates a vision-language model (VLM)-based semantic encoder with a la-tent diffusion model (LDM)-based semantic decoder. Specifically, the semantic encoder extracts source-aware personalized seman-tic tokens from both the source image and the receiver’s historical interactions. These tokens are vector-quantized into discrete semantic indices and further encoded into a compact fixed-length bitstream, enabling compatibility with digital transmission. At the receiver, the semantic decoder reconstructs a personalized im-age conditioned on the recovered semantic tokens. Furthermore, we formulate a capacity-constrained personalized semantic rate-distortion problem and introduce a semantic distortion metric that jointly characterizes source-semantic fidelity and user-preference alignment. Experiments show that PDSC achieves superior source-semantic consistency and personalization over state-of-the-art SC baselines, including CDDM and MoS, under bandwidth-limited wireless transmission. 

Index Terms —Personalized semantic communication, digital semantic communication, vision-language models, latent diffu-sion models, vector quantization. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

The rapid growth of visual-intensive applications, such as augmented reality and personalized content delivery, has imposed stringent requirements on bandwidth-efficient and low-latency wireless image transmission. Conventional com-munication systems, which aim to reliably transmit bitstreams under Shannon’s technical framework, usually preserve pixel-level fidelity without explicitly exploiting the semantic rel-evance of visual content. To reduce redundant and task-irrelevant information, semantic communication (SC) has emerged as a promising paradigm that transmits the meaning or task-relevant information rather than the raw data [1]. Despite recent advances in image semantic communication systems [2], most existing frameworks remain user-agnostic. They typically adopt a rigid one-size-fits-all strategy, where semantic importance is assumed to be universal and in-dependent of the receiver. Consequently, a single semantic representation is learned and optimized for generic reconstruc-tion or downstream tasks. In practical personalized services, however, semantic relevance is inherently receiver-dependent: the information that is useful, interesting, or actionable may vary significantly across users. For example, the same movie poster may attract different attention from users who prefer action movies, romantic movies, or animation. This observa-tion motivates semantic communication systems that are not only content-aware but also receiver-aware [3]. Recent advances in generative artificial intelligence, par-ticularly diffusion models [4], offer new opportunities for receiver-side semantic reconstruction. Diffusion-based genera-tive SC frameworks [5]–[7] have shown that compact semantic features transmitted over noisy channels can be transformed into high-quality images by leveraging powerful pretrained generative priors. For example, CDDM [5] employs a channel denoising diffusion model at the receiver to remove channel-induced perturbations from received semantic features. In [6], MoS adopts a mixture-of-semantics strategy to adaptively allocate bandwidth to regions of interest and non-interest, thereby improving transmission efficiency. However, these methods mainly focus on universal reconstruction quality and do not consider the receiver’s personal preference. As a result, the reconstructed images may preserve general source semantics but fail to reflect user-specific preferences. To fill these gaps, we propose a vision-language model (VLM)-enabled Personalized Digital Semantic Communica-tion (PDSC) framework, with the goal of reducing trans-mission overhead while reconstructing images that are both semantically faithful to the source and aligned with the receiver’s visual preference. The main contributions are:  

> •

We propose a VLM-based personalized semantic encoder that extracts preference, visual, and textual semantic tokens to capture receiver-dependent preference, source structure, and high-level semantic guidance, respectively.  

> •

We develop a vector-quantized interface to convert per-sonalized semantic tokens into a fixed-length bitstream, and an LDM-based decoder to reconstruct personalized images from the received semantics.  

> •

We formulate a capacity-constrained personalized seman-tic rate-distortion problem and introduce a semantic dis-tortion metric jointly measuring source-semantic fidelity and user-preference alignment. Experiments show that PDSC outperforms state-of-the-art SC baselines, CDDM and MoS, in semantic consistency and personalization under bandwidth-limited wireless transmission. II. S YSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION 

We consider an end-to-end wireless image transmission task between a transmitter and a receiver, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Let X ∈ RH×W ×C denote the source image to be transmitted, arXiv:2608.14260v1 [eess.IV] 14 Aug 2026 Fig. 1: The proposed personalized digital semantic communication (PDSC) framework for wireless image transmission. where H, W , and C denote the height, width, and number of channels, respectively. The receiver is characterized by a historical interaction set Hu = {x1, . . . , xN } that reflects its long-term visual preferences. The communication goal is to reconstruct an image ˆX that preserves the high-level semantics of X while being aligned with the personalized visual prefer-ence implied by Hu. To this end, we propose a personalized digital semantic communication (PDSC) framework consisting of a vision-language model (VLM)-based semantic encoder at the transmitter, a vector quantization and fixed-length coding module for digital transmission, and a latent diffusion model (LDM)-based semantic decoder at the receiver. 

A. Personalized Semantic Codec 

The semantic encoder extracts compact personalized se-mantic tokens by conditioning on both the source image X

and the user history Hu. This process is modeled as 

(zp, zv , zt) = Eϕ(X, Hu), (1) where Eϕ(·) denotes the personalized semantic encoder with trainable parameters ϕ. Here, zp denotes the preference token that captures source-relevant receiver preference, zv denotes visual-semantic tokens that preserve the structural and visual information of the source image, and zt denotes text-semantic tokens that provide explicit high-level semantic guidance. The three types of semantic tokens are projected into a common latent space and concatenated as 

Z = Concat [ zp, zv , zt] ∈ RL×d, (2) where L is the total number of transmitted semantic tokens and d is the token dimension. To enable digital transmission, the continuous semantic tokens are converted into discrete semantic indices through vector quantization. Let C = {c1, . . . , cK } ⊂ Rd denote a learnable semantic codebook with K codewords. Each semantic token zj is mapped to its nearest codeword by 

kj = arg min 

> k∈{ 1,...,K }

∥zj − ck∥2, ˜zj = ckj . (3) The resulting semantic index sequence is denoted by k =

{k1, . . . , k L}. With fixed-length binary coding, the semantic source rate is given by 

Rs = L⌈log 2 K⌉, (4) where L controls the number of transmitted semantic tokens and K controls the quantization resolution of each token. We consider a complex channel with Nch channel uses per image. Under channel signal-to-noise ratio SNR , the maximum reliably supported payload per image is 

Cch = Nch log 2(1 + SNR) . (5) After channel decoding, the receiver obtains ˆk =

{ˆk1, . . . , ˆkL} and retrieves the quantized tokens by codebook lookup, i.e., ˆzj = cˆkj for j = 1 , . . . , L . The recovered tokens are split into ˆzp, ˆzv , and ˆzt, and decoded to reconstruct the personalized image as 

ˆX = Dθ (ˆ zp, ˆzv , ˆzt), (6) where Dθ (·) denotes the diffusion-based semantic decoder. 

B. Personalized Semantic Distortion 

To evaluate the reconstruction quality from both the source and receiver perspectives, we define a personalized semantic distortion metric that jointly accounts for source-semantic fidelity and user-preference alignment: 

D(X, ˆX, Hu) = αL sem (X, ˆX) + (1 − α)Lpref ( ˆX, Hu), (7) where α ∈ [0 , 1] controls the tradeoff between preserving source semantics and matching user preference. The source-semantic fidelity term is defined as the cosine distance in a pretrained vision-language embedding space: 

Lsem (X, ˆX) = 1 − ΦI (X)TΦI ( ˆX)

∥ΦI (X)∥2∥ΦI ( ˆX)∥2

, (8) where ΦI (·) denotes the image encoder of a pretrained VLM. The preference alignment term measures the consistency between the reconstructed image and the receiver’s source-relevant historical preferences. To avoid treating all historical images equally, we assign each historical image a source-conditioned relevance weight: 

wi = exp (sim I,I (X, xi)/τ )

PNj=1 exp (sim I,I (X, xj )/τ ) , (9) where τ > 0 is a temperature parameter and 

sim I,I (a, b) = ΦI (a)TΦI (b)

∥ΦI (a)∥2∥ΦI (b)∥2

. (10) The preference alignment loss is then given by 

Lpref ( ˆX, Hu) = 1 −

> N

X

> i=1

wi sim I,I ( ˆX, xi). (11) Unlike conventional pixel-wise distortion metrics, the pro-posed distortion explicitly captures receiver-dependent seman-tic relevance by emphasizing historical preferences that are related to the current source image. 

C. Personalized Semantic Rate-Distortion Problem 

Under the fixed-length digital semantic interface, the system aims to minimize the expected personalized semantic distor-tion subject to the channel-dictated rate constraint. For a given semantic configuration (L, K ), the personalized semantic rate-distortion optimization problem is formulated as 

min  

> Θ

EX,Hu

h

D(X, ˆX, Hu)

i

s.t. Rs ≤ Cch .

(12) where Θ = {ϕ, θ, C} denotes the set of trainable parameters. The pair (L, K ) determines the semantic operating point, where increasing L transmits more semantic tokens, while increasing K reduces quantization distortion for each token. III. F RAMEWORK OF THE PROPOSED PDSC This section presents the implementation of PDSC, includ-ing the personalized semantic encoder, vector-quantized digi-tal interface, diffusion-based decoder, and training strategy. 

A. Personalized Semantic Encoder 

From a communication-theoretic perspective, the person-alized semantic encoder acts as a semantic source encoder to extract a compact representation sufficient to minimize the personalized semantic distortion. The receiver’s histori-cal interactions serve as semantic side information, allowing the encoder to suppress receiver-irrelevant visual information while retaining source attributes valuable to the intended user. First, a frozen visual tokenizer extracts visual token se-quences from the source image and historical images: 

E0 = VT( X) ∈ RL0×dvis , (13) 

Ei = VT( xi) ∈ RLi×dvis , i = 1 , . . . , N, (14) The historical visual tokens are then concatenated as 

EH = Concat [ E1, . . . , EN ] ∈ RLH×dvis . (15) Directly using all historical tokens is inefficient and may introduce preference information irrelevant to the current source image. Therefore, we employ a lightweight context filtering module to retain source-relevant historical tokens and preference-relevant source tokens. The source and historical tokens are first projected into a common hidden space and jointly processed by a Transformer encoder: 

(Z0, ZH) = Trans (Proj 0(E0), Proj H(EH)) , (16) where Z0 ∈ RL0×d and ZH ∈ RLH×d are context-enhanced source and history representations, respectively. The relevance score of each historical token is computed according to its maximum similarity to the source tokens: 

sH 

> j

= max  

> ℓ∈{ 1,...,L 0}

cos ( ZH[j], Z0[ℓ]) , j = 1 , . . . , L H. (17) Similarly, the relevance score of each source token with respect to the user history is defined as 

s0 

> ℓ

= max  

> j∈{ 1,...,L H}

cos ( Z0[ℓ], ZH[j]) , ℓ = 1 , . . . , L 0. (18) Based on these scores, top-ranked tokens are retained to form binary masks mh and ms. During training, the Gumbel-Softmax reparameterization is adopted to make the masking operation differentiable. During inference, hard top-M selec-tion is used. The filtered token sets are denoted by 

˜EH = Select( EH, mh), ˜E0 = Select( E0, ms). (19) The preference token is extracted by querying the filtered historical tokens with the filtered source tokens through a cross-attention module: 

Ap = Softmax ( ˜E0WQ)( ˜EHWK )T

√dk

!

˜EHWV , (20) where WQ, WK , and WV are learnable projection matrices. The preference token is obtained by average pooling and nonlinear projection: 

zp = MLP p (AvgPool( Ap)) ∈ RLp×d. (21) The visual-semantic tokens are extracted from the filtered source tokens to preserve source structure and visual layout. Instead of directly transmitting dense visual features, we use a set of learnable visual queries Qv ∈ RLv ×d to aggregate compact source information: 

zv = CrossAttn 



Qv , Proj v ( ˜E0), Proj v ( ˜E0)



∈ RLv ×d.

(22) To provide explicit high-level semantic guidance, a cap-tioning model generates a textual description of the source image. The generated text is then encoded and projected into the common semantic space: 

zt = Proj t (TextEnc (BLIP( X))) ∈ RLt×d, (23) where BLIP( ·) denotes the image captioning module and 

TextEnc( ·) denotes the text encoder. 

B. Vector-Quantized Digital Semantic Interface 

The continuous tokens Z are quantized into indices k using the codebook C. Since nearest-neighbor quantization is non-differentiable, we use the straight-through estimator [8]: 

˜zj = zj + sg ckj − zj

 , (24) where sg[ ·] denotes stop-gradient. In the forward pass, ˜zj

equals the selected codeword ckj , while in the backward pass, gradients are copied from the quantized token to the encoder output. The VQ loss is expressed as 

Lvq = 1

L

> L

X

> j=1

sg[ zj ] − ckj 

> 22

+ βcom 

1

L

> L

X

> j=1

zj − sg[ ckj ] 22 ,

(25) where the first term updates the codebook, while the second encourages the outputs to stay close to the selected codewords; 

βcom controls the strength of the commitment term. To avoid codebook collapse and promote balanced code-word usage, we further introduce an entropy-based regularizer: 

Lu =

> K

X

> k=1

ˆpk log(ˆ pk + ϵ), (26) where ˆpk is the empirical usage frequency of the k-th code-word in a mini-batch and ϵ is a small constant for numerical stability. Minimizing Lu encourages a high-entropy codeword distribution and alleviates codebook collapse. At the receiver, after channel decoding, the recovered index sequence ˆk = {ˆk1, . . . , ˆkL} is mapped back to quantized tokens ˆzj = cˆkj through codebook lookup. The recovered token sequence is then split into ˆzp, ˆzv , and ˆzt according to the predefined token layout. 

C. Diffusion-Based Semantic Decoder 

The semantic decoder reconstructs images from the re-covered tokens using an LDM prior. Let x0 be the latent representation of the target image. The forward diffusion process is 

xt = √¯αtx0 + √1 − ¯αtϵ, ϵ ∼ N (0, I), (27) where t is the diffusion step and ¯αt denotes the cumulative noise schedule. The denoising network predicts the injected noise conditioned on the recovered semantic tokens: 

ˆϵ = ϵθ (xt, t, ˆzp, ˆzv , ˆzt) , (28) where ϵθ (·) denotes the conditional denoising network. 

Algorithm 1: Training and Inference of PDSC 

Require: Training data D, token number L, codebook size 

K, codebook C, loss weights λvq , λu, λs

Ensure: Trained semantic encoder Eϕ, codebook C, and semantic decoder Dθ

// Semantic token alignment  

> 1:

Freeze the pretrained visual tokenizer, VLM components, and diffusion backbone.  

> 2:

repeat  

> 3:

Sample a mini-batch (X, Hu) from D. 

> 4:

Extract semantic tokens (zp, zv , zt) = Eϕ(X, Hu). 

> 5:

Quantize semantic tokens into indices k and tokens 

(˜ zp, ˜zv , ˜zt). 

> 6:

Compute LI. 

> 7:

Update Eϕ, projection layers, and C. 

> 8:

until convergence 

// Personalization adaptation  

> 9:

Unfreeze the condition-injection modules of Dθ . 

> 10:

repeat  

> 11:

Sample a mini-batch (X, Hu) from D. 

> 12:

Extract and quantize semantic tokens as in Stage I.  

> 13:

Generate ˆX = Dθ (˜ zp, ˜zv , ˜zt) or its efficient approximation.  

> 14:

Compute LII . 

> 15:

Update Eϕ, C, and the condition-injection modules.  

> 16:

until convergence 

// Inference  

> 17:

Extract and quantize semantic tokens into indices k. 

> 18:

Encode k into a fixed-length bitstream and transmit it with channel coding and digital modulation.  

> 19:

Recover ˆk after channel decoding and obtain the corresponding semantic tokens.  

> 20:

Reconstruct ˆX = Dθ (ˆ zp, ˆzv , ˆzt).Following the conditioning design of diffusion models [9], 

ˆzp is injected through cross-attention to guide personalized attributes, ˆzv modulates U-Net features via feature-wise linear modulation to preserve structure, and ˆzt provides text-level semantic guidance. This multi-path conditioning design en-ables the decoder to jointly balance personalization, structural preservation, and semantic consistency. During training, the diffusion denoising loss is given by 

Ldiff = Et, ϵ

h

∥ϵ − ϵθ (xt, t, ˜zp, ˜zv , ˜zt)∥22

i

, (29) where ˜zp, ˜zv , and ˜zt are the quantized semantic tokens produced by the straight-through estimator. At inference, the personalized image is generated by deter-ministic or stochastic diffusion sampling: 

ˆX = Dθ (ˆ zp, ˆzv , ˆzt) , (30) where Dθ (·) denotes the full LDM-based semantic decoder. 

D. Training and Inference 

To improve convergence and training stability, we adopt a two-stage training strategy. First, we freeze the pretrained visual tokenizer, VLM components, and diffusion backbone, and train only the semantic encoder, projection layers, and codebook using the loss: 

LI = Ldiff + λvq Lvq + λuLu, (31) where λvq and λu balance the VQ loss and the usage reg-ularizer, respectively. This stage forces the discrete semantic codewords to become compatible with the pretrained diffusion prior. We then unfreeze the condition-injection modules of the diffusion decoder and jointly fine-tune them with the semantic encoder and codebook. The objective is augmented with a personalized semantic distortion: 

LII = Ldiff + λvq Lvq + λuLu + λsD(X, ˆX, Hu). (32) where the distortion term is computed using the predicted clean latent or a low-step decoded reconstruction to reduce training cost. During inference, the transmitter extracts and quantizes personalized semantic tokens, encodes the indices into a bit-stream, and transmits them with conventional channel coding and modulation. The receiver recovers the indices, retrieves the codewords, and reconstructs the image using the diffusion decoder. Algorithm 1 summarizes the procedure. IV. P ERFORMANCE EVALUATION 

We evaluate PDSC for wireless image transmission over an AWGN channel. Experiments are conducted using MovieLens-Latest user-rating records [10] with the corre-sponding movie poster images collected from public metadata. For each receiver, we select N = 5 positively rated posters to form the historical preference set Hu. The VLM module is implemented based on LaVIT [11], and the semantic decoder is built upon Stable Diffusion XL [4]. Unless otherwise specified, we set Lp = 1 , Lv = 15 , Lt = 5 , and thus L = 21 .The codebook size is K = 1024 . The model is trained with Adam using a learning rate of 10 −4, and the loss weights are 

λvq = 1 .0, λu = 0 .1, and λs = 1 .0.

A. Baselines and Metric 

We compare PDSC with three representative baselines: 1) 

BPG+LDPC , a separation-based scheme where the source image is compressed by BPG and protected by LDPC channel coding; 2) CDDM [5], a diffusion-based semantic commu-nication method using a channel denoising diffusion model for reconstruction; and 3) MoS [6], a mixture-of-semantics method that transmits compact semantic features for gen-erative reconstruction. For fair comparison, all methods are constrained to the same information bit budget per image before channel coding. To measure the personalized semantic reconstruction qual-ity, we adopt two metrics: 1) CLIP Image Score (CIS) 

measures the CLIP image similarity between the reconstructed image and the receiver’s historical preference images, reflect-ing user-preference alignment; 2) CLIP Score (CS) measures semantic consistency between the reconstructed image and 0 5 10 15 20     

> SNR (dB)
> 20 30 40 50 60 70
> CIS
> BPG+LDPC CDDM MoS PDSC
> (a) CIS versus SNR. 0510 15 20
> SNR (dB)
> 12 14 16 18 20 22
> CS
> BPG+LDPC CDDM MoS PDSC
> (b) CS versus SNR.

Fig. 2: Robustness comparison under different channel SNRs. the textual descriptions of the source image. Higher CIS and CS indicate better personalization and source-semantic preservation, respectively. 

B. Robustness to Channel SNR 

Fig. 2 examines the robustness of different schemes under different channel SNRs, with the semantic source rate fixed at 210 bits/image. As expected, both CIS and CS increase with the SNR, since a more reliable channel improves se-mantic index recovery. PDSC consistently outperforms all baselines, especially in the low-SNR regime. Compared with the strongest baseline MoS, PDSC improves CIS by 45.8% and CS by 15.4% at 0 dB, and still achieves 21.1% and 5.7% gains at 20 dB, respectively. Averaged over all tested SNRs, PDSC provides 28.2% higher CIS and 9.0% higher CS than MoS. This improvement is attributed to the compact receiver-conditioned semantic indices, which are more robust to channel perturbations and more relevant to personalized reconstruction. In contrast, BPG+LDPC suffers from residual bit errors and error propagation, while CDDM and MoS do not explicitly model receiver preference. Moreover, CS varies more smoothly than CIS, indicating that personalized semantic alignment is more sensitive to the accurate recovery of preference-related information. 147 168 189 210 231 

Rate (bits/image) 

> 30 40 50 60 70
> CIS
> BPG+LDPC CDDM MoS PDSC

(a) CIS versus semantic rate. 147 168 189 210 231 

Rate (bits/image) 

> 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
> CS
> BPG+LDPC CDDM MoS PDSC

(b) CS versus semantic rate. 

Fig. 3: Rate-distortion comparison vs. different semantic rates. 

C. Rate-Distortion Analysis 

We next evaluate the rate-distortion performance under different semantic bit budgets. The SNR is fixed at 20 dB. For PDSC, L is fixed to 21, while K varies in 

{128 , 256 , 512 , 1024 , 2048 }, corresponding to 147, 168, 189, 210, and 231 bits/image, respectively, according to 

Rs = L⌈log 2 K⌉. (33) All baselines are tested under the same bit budgets. Fig. 3 presents the CIS and CS results versus the se-mantic source rate. It can be observed that both metrics improve as the rate increases, because a larger codebook reduces semantic quantization distortion and preserves richer source information. PDSC achieves the best performance at all considered rates, demonstrating its superior rate-distortion efficiency. Compared with MoS, PDSC improves CIS by 27.7% and CS by 8.6% at the lowest rate of 147 bits/image. At the default rate of 210 bits/image, PDSC still achieves 21.1% higher CIS and 5.7% higher CS than MoS. Averaged over all tested rates, PDSC provides 23.1% and 6.7% gains in CIS and CS, respectively. The reason is that PDSC allocates the limited bit budget to receiver-aware and task-relevant semantics, rather than transmitting redundant low-level details. Compared with BPG+LDPC, PDSC avoids the inefficiency of pixel-level compression for personalized reconstruction. Com-pared with CDDM and MoS, PDSC explicitly exploits receiver preference, thereby generating images that are more consistent with the personalized semantic objective. Furthermore, the performance gain tends to saturate at high semantic rates. In particular, increasing the codebook size beyond K = 1024 

provides only marginal improvement, indicating that most useful personalized semantics have already been captured. V. C ONCLUSION 

In this paper, we proposed a PDSC framework for per-sonalized wireless image transmission. Unlike existing user-agnostic semantic communication schemes, PDSC exploits users’ historical interactions at the transmitter to extract source-aware personalized semantic tokens. To enable digital transmission, we designed a vector-quantized fixed-length semantic interface to convert continuous semantic tokens into a compact bitstream. At the receiver, a latent diffusion-based semantic decoder reconstructs personalized images from the recovered semantic tokens. We further introduced a person-alized semantic distortion metric to jointly evaluate source-semantic fidelity and user-preference alignment. Experimental results demonstrated that PDSC achieves superior semantic quality and personalization over existing baselines, particu-larly under limited bandwidth conditions. REFERENCES [1] X. Luo, H.-H. Chen, and Q. Guo, “Semantic communications: Overview, open issues, and future research directions,” IEEE Wireless Commun. , vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 122–129, 2022. [2] P. Jiang, C.-K. Wen, S. Jin, and G. Y. Li, “Semantic communication for image transmission: A transformer-based approach,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett. , vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 1384–1388, 2022. [3] D. G¨ und¨ uz, Z. Qin, I. E. Aguerri, H. S. Dhillon, Z. Yang, A. Yener, K.-K. Wong, and C.-B. Chae, “Beyond transmitting bits: Context, semantics, and task-oriented communications,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. , vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 5–41, 2023. [4] D. Podell, Z. English, K. Lacey, A. Blattmann, T. Dockhorn, J. M¨ uller, J. Penna, and R. Rombach, “Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image synthesis,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR) , 2024. [5] T. Wu, Z. Chen, D. He, L. Qian, Y. Xu, M. Tao, and W. Zhang, “Cddm: Channel denoising diffusion models for wireless semantic communications,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 11 168–11 183, 2024. [6] J. Ni, T. Wu, Z. Chen, Y. Xu, M. Tao, and W. Zhang, “Mixture of se-mantics transmission for generative ai-enabled semantic communication systems,” IEEE Commun. Lett. , vol. 29, no. 12, pp. 2770–2774, Dec. 2025. [7] N. Li, Y. Deng, and D. Niyato, “Goal-oriented semantic communication for wireless video transmission via generative ai,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 25, pp. 10 841–10 854, 2026. [8] A. van den Oord, O. Vinyals, and K. Kavukcuoglu, “Neural discrete rep-resentation learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS) ,vol. 30, 2017. [9] R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, and B. Ommer, “High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) , 2022, pp. 10 684–10 695. [10] F. M. Harper and J. A. Konstan, “The movielens datasets: History and context,” ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst. , vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 1–19, 2015. [11] Y. Jin, K. Xu, K. Xu, L. Chen, C. Liao, J. Tan, Q. Huang, B. Chen, C. Song, D. Meng, D. Zhang, W. Ou, K. Gai, and Y. Mu, “Unified language-vision pretraining in llm with dynamic discrete visual tok-enization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR) , 2024.