Title: The Equalizer: Introducing Shape-Gain Decomposition in Neural Audio Codecs

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.15491v1

Published Time: Wed, 18 Feb 2026 01:44:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# The Equalizer: Introducing Shape-Gain Decomposition in Neural Audio Codecs 

Samir Sadok a, ∗, Laurent Girin b, ∗, Xavier Alameda-Pineda a

> aInria at Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, LJK, France
> bUniv. Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble-INP, GIPSA-lab, France

Abstract 

Neural audio codecs (NACs) typically encode the short-term energy (gain) and normalized structure (shape) of speech/audio signals jointly within the same latent space. As a result, they are poorly robust to a global variation of the input signal level in the sense that such variation has strong influence on the embedding vectors at the output of the encoder and their quantization. This methodology is inherently inefficient, leading to codebook redundancy and suboptimal bitrate-distortion performance. To address these limitations, we propose to introduce shape-gain decomposition, widely used in classical speech/audio coding, into the NAC framework. The principle of the proposed Equalizer methodology is to decompose the input signal—before the NAC encoder—into gain and normalized shape vector on a short-term basis. The shape vector is processed by the NAC, while the gain is quantized with scalar quantization and transmitted separately. The output (decoded) signal is reconstructed from the normalized output of the NAC and the quantized gain. Our experiments conducted on speech signals show that this general methodology, easily applicable to any NAC, enables a substantial gain in bitrate-distortion performance, as well as a massive reduction in complexity. 

Keywords: Neural audio codecs, shape-gain decomposition, vector quantization, speech coding. 

1. Introduction 

Speech/audio codecs aim to convert time-domain speech and/or audio signals into compressed bitstreams, and back, for both efficient transmission and storage. After decades of development based on classical signal processing tech-niques (Jayant & Noll, 1985; Gersho & Gray, 1992; Kleijn & Paliwal, 1995; Spanias et al., 2007), neural audio codecs (NACs) based on deep neural networks (DNNs) and trained on massive datasets have emerged as the new de facto stan-dards due to their promising performance. Among the many NACs recently proposed in the literature, we can mention SoundStream (Zeghidour et al., 2021), EnCodec (Défossez et al., 2022), DAC (Kumar et al., 2023), Speech-Tokenizer (Zhang et al., 2023), TS3-Codec (Wu et al., 2024), Mini (Défossez et al., 2024), BigCodec (Xin et al., 2024), and diffusion-based codecs (Foti & Brendel, 2025). More-over, NACs are also used as audio tokenizers that provide discrete signal representations called tokens that are suit-able for various efficient processing such as denoising or generation; see the review by Mousavi et al. (2025). An NAC is typically composed of an encoder that trans-forms the input signal into a latent continuous vector rep-resentation called embeddings , a quantizer, and a decoder that transforms the quantized embeddings back to the sig-nal domain. This general principle is illustrated in Block 2 of Figure 2. For the encoder and decoder, a wide range of    

> ∗Corresponding authors, equal contributions
> Email addresses: samir.sadok@inria.fr (Samir Sadok),
> laurent.girin@grenoble-inp.fr (Laurent Girin)

neural architectures have been explored, including convolu-tional networks (CNNs) for local feature extraction (Kumar et al., 2023), recurrent models (RNNs, LSTMs, GRUs) for temporal modeling (Défossez et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023), pure Transformers for long-range dependencies (Wu et al., 2024), and hybrid CNN–Transformer architectures (Défossez et al., 2024). The quantization mechanism that maps the continuous embedding vectors into discrete tokens is a central com-ponent of any NAC. Several quantizer design strategies have been used in NACs, most of them inherited from classical methods (Gersho & Gray, 1992). This includes: k-means clustering ; residual vector quantization (RVQ) initially proposed as “multistage VQ” by Juang & Gray (1982) and implemented in SoundStream, EnCodec, and SpeechTokenizer ; group vector quantization (GVQ) ini-tially proposed as “partitioned VQ” or “split-VQ”, closely related to product code VQ (PVQ) (Gersho & Gray, 1992), and combined with RVQ in a NAC by Yang et al. (2023) ; or finite scalar quantization (FSQ) (Mentzer et al., 2023). The resulting quantizers can operate at fixed, scalable, or adaptive bitrates (Agustsson et al., 2017). They can be learned in a decoupled fashion, where encoders, decoders, and quantizers are optimized separately, or jointly in an end-to-end manner using reconstruction, adversarial, diffu-sion, or masked prediction objectives (Mousavi et al., 2025). Additional techniques such as stop-gradient and exponen-tial moving average codebook updates (Van Den Oord et al., 2017) are commonly employed to improve the codebook design stability and codebook utilization rate. 

> arXiv:2602.15491v1 [cs.SD] 17 Feb 2026

Despite their diversity in DNN and VQ design, it is striking to notice that most modern NACs share the same above-mentioned general structure. However, the complex 

non-linear mapping made by the encoder has a direct major consequence that is at the same time trivial, questionable, and, a bit surprisingly, not discussed in the literature (to our knowledge): Two signals that are colinear in the input (waveform) space, i.e. identical up to a gain factor, are generally mapped to embedding vectors that are not colin-ear. As a result, the latent representation at the output of the encoder entangles the signal amplitude and structural content into a single vector space. This contrasts sharply with the common assumption that, on a short-term basis, speech/audio signals often have a similar general shape (e.g. spectral content) and different energy levels. In other words, the shape of a speech/audio signal can be invariant to magnitude. This realistic assumption is largely exploited in many speech/audio processing techniques. For exam-ple, it is at the core of the linear prediction coding (LPC) technique, which is widely used in speech analysis and speech coding, and that separates the gain and normalized spectral envelope encoded by the prediction coefficients (Atal & Hanauer, 1971; Markel & Gray, 1976). Another example is cepstral modeling, in which the first coefficient encodes the energy and other coefficients encode the nor-malized spectral envelope on a logarithmic scale (Rabiner & Schafer, 2007; Benesty et al., 2008). This general shape-gain decomposition principle can be summarized as follows: at a signal segment level, i.e. a short-term frame of wave-form samples or any vector representing this short-term frame, the signal is decomposed into a gain (representing its magnitude or energy) and a shape vector (representing its normalized direction, envelope, spectral shape, etc.). Most importantly for our study, shape-gain decomposition is widely-used in classic speech/audio codecs, in particular when using VQ: It is processed before the application of VQ to the normalized shape vector and scalar quantization to the gain (Gersho & Gray, 1992; Oehler & Gray, 1993; Kleijn & Paliwal, 1995; Gersho, 2002; Spanias et al., 2007). Examples of standardized codecs that use such shape-gain VQ include CELP (Schroeder & Atal, 1985), AMR (Bes-sette et al., 2003), and Opus (Valin et al., 2012), to name a few. Note that shape-gain VQ is compatible with the use of a linear transform before quantization (and inverse linear transform after quantization; e.g. the Modified Dis-crete Cosine Transform (MDCT) in MPEG-2 AAC codecs (Bosi et al., 1997; Noll, 2002)), as opposed to the non-linear encoder and decoder of NACs. Shape-gain VQ has several major advantages over direct VQ. First, it generally improves the rate-distortion perfor-mance. Indeed, let us consider the typical case of several input vectors with a similar general shape and different energy levels. With direct VQ, the vector quantizer must allocate multiple codewords to represent what is essentially the same acoustic structure at different loudness levels. This results in a very large codebook with many different codeword subsets, each subset encoding the same shape and different gain values. In contrast, with shape-gain VQ, these vectors are encoded with the same vector codeword plus a scalar gain prototype value that requires a very limited bitrate. Therefore, the size of the VQ codebook can be significantly reduced. This not only generally leads to a better rate-distortion performance, but this also en-ables to drastically decrease the complexity of the codecs, which is directly related to the codebook size, since the search of the optimal codeword in the codebook is often the most computationally demanding operation in signal compression (Gersho & Gray, 1992). In addition, the use of normalized vectors has been shown to help stabilize the design of VQ codebooks (Yu et al., 2021). A bit surprisingly, to our knowledge, modern neural codecs, including SoundStream, EnCodec, and DAC, have not considered integrating the shape-gain decomposition principle. Instead, as already mentioned, they let the am-plitude and shape of an input vector be encoded jointly in the corresponding embedding vector. Although NACs already impress with their performance in terms of data rate-distortion trade-off, this approach is problematic. If a simple gain variation induces a significant directional change in the latent space, this leads to suboptimal code-book design and usage and reduced robustness to input signal variability. This problem may be solved, and thus performance significantly improved (and/or complexity sig-nificantly reduced), by introducing shape-gain coding in the NAC framework. Finally, explicit control over signal energy can bring more interpretability in the NAC framework. In the remainder of this paper, we address this prob-lem in two steps. First, in Section 2, we report a series of empirical observations that demonstrate and quantify the sensitivity of current state-of-the-art NACs to a global gain variation of the input waveform, illustrating the detri-mental entanglement of amplitude and shape in the latent space. Second, in Section 3, we introduce The Equalizer, a methodological framework that explicitly integrates shape-gain decomposition into the neural coding pipeline as a solution to this problem. Section 4 presents a series of experimental results obtained with speech signals, which demonstrate that the proposed Equalizer approach not only ensures robust performance invariance across a wide range of input gain levels, but also leads to substantial gain in performance in terms of bitrate-distortion trade-off and complexity reduction. By revisiting the classical shape-gain decomposition and quantization within a modern learning framework, we aim to contribute to bridge the gap between classical signal processing wisdom and contemporary NAC design, combining robustness to input signal variability, interpretability, and rate-distortion-complexity efficiency with the flexibility of learned representations. 

2. An Experimental analysis of the Sensitivity of Neural Audio Codecs to the Input Gain 

In this Section, we motivate the introduction of the shape-gain decomposition in the NAC framework by con-2Figure 1: Effect of global input gain variation on BigCodec (Xin et al., 2024), SpeechTokenizer (Zhang et al., 2023) and DAC (Kumar et al., 2023) latent representations. Top: Average embedding norm (normalized to 0dB). Middle: Average cosine similarity with the 0dB reference embedding. Bottom: Discrete code stability after quantization of the embedding vectors. The vertical dashed line marks 0dB, the reference gain. 

ducting an empirical analysis of the effect of an input signal global level variation over the distribution and quantization of the embedding vectors in a representative NAC. The presented experiments aim at answering the following two fundamental questions: (i) Does input gain variation pri-marily affect the norm, the direction, or both in the latent space? (ii) What is the impact of input gain variations on the stability of the resulting discrete codes? In these experiments, the input waveform s of an NAC is modified solely by a global gain factor, while all other signal characteristics are kept fixed, resulting in the gain-scaled version 

sα = 10 α/ 20 · s, (1) where the gain factor α is expressed in dB and is varied from −12 to +12 dB. We observed the behavior of the corresponding embeddings z = fθ (s) and zα = fθ (sα),where fθ (·) denotes the encoder. 1 This was done before and after quantization, and for three different NACs that are representative of the state-of-the-art and for which the source code is available, namely DAC, SpeechTokenizer, and BigCodec. All results presented below are obtained by averaging the metrics over 162 minutes of speech signals from the LibriSpeech dataset (Panayotov et al., 2015). Figure 1 (Top) displays the average norm of the embed-ding vectors zα as a function of α. For easier visualization and interpretation, the norm of zα is normalized by that of 

z. Figure 1 (Middle) displays the average cosine similarity between z and zα as a function of α.First, we can see in Figure 1 (Top) that, within the se-lected interval of gain values, the average embedding vector norm is a non-symmetric monotonic non-linear function of the input gain α, indicating that (at least one part of) the gain information is explicitly encoded in the magnitude of the latent representations, but in a complex manner. Inter-estingly, the function is increasing for SpeechTokenizer and BigCodec, but it is decreasing, with a lower dynamic, for DAC, indicating that it seems idiosyncratic to the codec. Second, and more critically, we can see in Figure 1 (Middle) that the cosine similarity between the embeddings 

zα and z decreases significantly as the gain departs from the reference level. This is especially true for BigCodec and DAC, with a fast exponential decrease for DAC, and a negative parabola decrease for BigCodec that is slower but reaches lower values at min and max tested values of α

(0.5 at −12 dB and 0.4 at +12 dB). This clearly shows that gain variations in the input signal induce substantial direc-tional changes in the latent space. This effect is observed in all NACs tested, although its magnitude varies between models. The decrease is more limited for SpeechTokenizer, probably due to the fact that during training its first VQ stage is distilled with Hubert embeddings that mostly carry phonetic/semantic information (Zhang et al., 2023), with a joint influence on the encoder due to end-to-end training. This results in embedding vectors that are more indepen-dent of the gain compared to other codecs. Interestingly, all three curves in Figure 1 (Middle) are close to symmetric with respect to the Y axis, which was difficult to guess. Finally, Figure 1 (Bottom) displays the average dis-crete code stability (DCS) as a function of α. DCS is a measure of the effect of the gain on the quantization of the embedding vectors: it is the percentage of frames for which the codeword indices were different for z and     

> 1In fact, sand sαare segmented in a set of short-term frames that produce a set of corresponding short-term embeddings vectors, but we keep the notation as light as possible in this section.

3Figure 2: Architecture of the proposed Equalizer neural audio coding framework based on shape-gain decomposition. Block 1: The input signal     

> sis decomposed into a temporal gain envelope and an equalized waveform ¯susing short-term analysis, normalization, and OLA synthesis. Block 2: The resulting successive shape vectors are processed by a NAC applying vector quantization on the corresponding embedding vectors. Block 3: In parallel, the gain is quantized with scalar quantization (typically μ-law). Block 4: The decoded equalized output waveform and the quantized gain are used to generate the final output waveform using again short-term analysis-synthesis with OLA.

zα, i.e. for which the gain induced a change of codeword. Although they have slightly different dynamics, all three curves look like fastly-decaying exponentials, indicating that even small variations in gain can induce a substantial change in codeword. A DSC of 0.45 -0.15 (i.e. 55% -85% of codeword change) depending on the codec can be observed for only a ±4dB gain variation (here also, the curves are surprisingly symmetric). Note that a limited change in both norm and direction of an embedding vector can lead to a change of codeword. This indicates that several code-words are available to encode embedding vectors that are close to each other, corresponding to input vectors that differ only by a limited gain variation. In short, we observe a hypersensitivity of the codeword allocation to the input gain, which is clearly not a desired property in VQ. In short, our empirical analysis demonstrates (i) that gain and shape are strongly entangled in the latent space of current NACs, and (ii) a strong sensitivity of the NACs (and thus of their codebook design) to the input signal gain. This gain sensitivity is not merely a benign scaling effect, but a structural property that affects codeword al-location and utilization at inference time and codebook design at training time. All this comes in sharp contrast with the shape-gain decomposition principle that underlie classical speech/audio coding, as discussed in the introduc-tion. These findings motivate the need for a global NAC framework that explicitly controls or factors out the input signal gain. 

3. Proposed Method: The Equalizer 

In this section, we present a general methodology, that we call The Equalizer, for exploiting the shape-gain decom-position of speech/audio signals in the NAC framework. We then implement this methodology for a typical NAC, derived from the widely-used EnCodec model, and show that the proposed method enables a large increase in the performance of this codec in terms of bitrate-distortion-complexity trade-off. 

3.1. General Principle and Method Overview 

As discussed in Section 1 and illustrated in Section 2, one notable problem encountered with NACs is that their non-linear encoder entangles the gain and shape informa-tion of the input signal into a single embedding vector. If we want to resort to shape-gain decomposition to improve coding efficiency, obviously, applying it at the embedding vectors quantization level, i.e. after the encoder, is not an option: This is simply too late. Instead, we propose to apply the shape-gain decomposition before the encoder, i.e. at the input signal level. The corresponding shape-gain recomposition is applied at the output of the decoder. The general workflow of the proposed Equalizer methodology is illustrated in Figure 2. In some more details, this process is done classically on a short-term frame basis: Each short-term frame of the input waveform is normalized in energy before being sent as an input to the NAC encoder (Block 1 in Figure 2). In this way, input vectors with similar shape and different gains are first transformed to similar normalized vectors before being fed to the encoder, resulting in similar embedding vectors that can be quantized with the same codeword. Note that this requires retraining the NAC on normalized data (see details in Section 4.1). The gain of each short-term frame is quantized separately with scalar quantization and then transmitted to the output of the decoder (Block 3). There, the sequence of quantized gains and the corresponding decoded normalized shape vectors are recombined using overlap-add synthesis to generate the final output waveform with restored energy profile (Block 4). 4It can be noted that, in the present study, the shape-gain decomposition and recomposition steps (as well as the gain quantization) are implemented as modules that are external to the NAC. In other words, the shape-gain decomposition and shape vector normalization are not applied directly to the vectors taken as input by the encoder. Instead, a complete waveform is reconstructed from the sequence of normalized short-term frames before being sent to the NAC. In the present study, we refer to this process as frame-wise gain equalization —or simply equalization for concision—of the input waveform. 2 Similarly, we retrieve the complete decoded equalized waveform at the decoder output and apply frame-wise gain restoration , i.e. deequalization, to this waveform. This is because of two reasons: First, we do not necessarily have easy access to the input vectors that are actually sent to the encoder and that may result from some specific pre-processing of the input waveform. The same is true for the output vectors just after the decoder. This depends on the NAC, its implementation, and the ‘transparency’ of the code. Second, we want to provide a proof of concept of the proposed methodology that remains general and easily applicable to any NAC with a minimal amount of work. Implementing the shape-gain decomposition/recomposition on the actual short-term input/output vectors processed by the encoder/decoder of a specific target codec does not change the foundations of the proposed method. In the case where access to these vectors is easy, applying the proposed methodology directly to them is straightforward. Note also that, in this study, we do not implement our methodology in a streaming mode, where all processes in the pipe-line would be applied consistently on a causal frame-by-frame basis, but this is totally feasible without difficulty. 

3.2. Implementation Details Equalization of the Input Waveform. Following the stan-dard methodology in speech/audio analysis-synthesis (Ra-biner & Schafer, 2007; Spanias et al., 2007; Benesty et al., 2008), the input signal s is first centered and then seg-mented into overlapping frames sw[m] using an analysis window w of length N and shift H:

sw[m] = s(mH : mH + N − 1) ⊙ w, (2) where ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication. Then, for each frame, the gain, here denoted gm, is computed as: 

gm = ∥sw[m]∥2 =

vuutN −1X

> n=0

|sw[m, n ]|2, (3) where n represents the intra-frame sample index ranging from 0 to N − 1. This scalar value represents the local 

> 2Not to be confused with spectral equalization widely used in audio processing.

energy of the speech/audio signal, and the succession of 

gm values over the frames represents its energy temporal envelope (or profile). The normalized shape vector, denoted 

¯sw[m], is then obtained by: 

¯sw[m] = sw[m]

gm + ϵ , (4) where ϵ = 10 −12 is a small constant used to prevent numer-ical instability if gm is equal to zero. To reconstruct a complete equalized waveform, which is the signal form intended at the encoder input, the individ-ual normalized signal frames are multiplied by a synthesis window ws and recombined using an overlap-add (OLA) procedure (Rabiner & Schafer, 2007; Spanias et al., 2007; Benesty et al., 2008): 

¯s(n) = X

> m

¯sw[m, n − mH ] · ws(n − mH ). (5) The settings of the short-term analysis and resynthesis are given in Section 4.1 and are motivated in the Appendix. The resulting signal ¯s retains the fine time-frequency char-acteristics of the original input while exhibiting a constant energy profile. This allows the NAC to focus exclusively on the structural characteristics of the waveform. 

Shape Vector Quantization. The equalized waveform ¯s is sent to the NAC, which will thus process the correspond-ing sequence of normalized shape vectors. The NAC is based on EnCodec (Défossez et al., 2022). It employs a convolutional-based encoder-decoder network that per-forms temporal downscaling with a specific striding factor, reducing the temporal resolution into a compact latent space. Following the architecture proposed in SpeechTo-kenizer, we have replaced the original two-layer LSTM following the convolution blocks in EnCodec with a two-layer Bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM). This modification aims to augment the semantic modeling ability of the net-work by capturing dependencies from both past and future contexts within the sequence. Each embedding vector ob-tained at the output of the encoder is quantized using RVQ. This method uses multiple cascaded quantization layers, where each successive layer quantizes the residual error of the preceding stage using a different codebook (Gersho & Gray, 1992; Oehler & Gray, 1993). This hierarchical approach enables to drastically reduce the complexity of the encoding at each stage, while ensuring high-fidelity reconstruction when a sufficient number of layers is used. 

Gain Quantization. In parallel to the shape VQ, the gain 

gm is encoded using a non-linear scalar quantizer. Given that human perception of loudness is logarithmic, we apply 

μ-law quantization (Gersho & Gray, 1992) to the gain values. The μ-law transformation is defined as: 

F (gm) = sgn (gm) ln(1 + μ|gm|)ln(1 + μ) , (6) 5where we set μ = 255 . This mapping provides a finer quan-tization resolution for small amplitudes, which is critical for maintaining audio quality in low-energy signal portions. On the decoder side, the inverse μ-law transformation is applied to restore the gain to its original dynamic range. 

Output Signal Deequalization. The final stage of the pro-posed Equalizer method is the deequalization of the output signal ˆ¯s, i.e. recovery of the original signal level dynamics. This process is similar to the equalization of the input wave-form, except that here the quantized gain ˆgm is applied to each short-term frame of ˆ¯s to restore its original loudness (up to quantization errors): 

ˆsw[m] = ˆ gm ·  ˆ¯s(mH : mH + N − 1) ⊙ w . (7) Finally, the output waveform ˆs is obtained again using OLA synthesis: 

ˆs(n) = X

> m

ˆsw[m, n − mH ] · ws (n − mH ) . (8) With a proper choice and setting of the analysis-resynthesis parameters (see the Appendix), the overall process ensures that the signal maintains high perceptual quality. By decoupling the gain and the shape during all the processing phases and recombining them only at the final step, the Equalizer effectively preserves both the global dynamics and the fine-grained spectral details of the original audio. 

4. Experiments 

4.1. Experimental Setup Data. All experiments were carried out on 16-kHz speech signals. All models were trained using the LibriSpeech-100 

dataset (Panayotov et al., 2015), randomly divided into 

90 % for training and 10 % for validation. The evaluation relies on the standard test-clean partition ( 2, 620 utterances from 40 distinct speakers, ≈ 5.4 h) to ensure zero overlap with the training data. To demonstrate the interest of the proposed Equalizer method, we followed the same line as in Section 2, using test signals modified by a global gain as in equation (1), for a wide range of input gains, from −12 to 

+12 dB (with a 2-dB step). Note that the test data at 0 dB have the same average level as the training data. In other words, the input gain variation can be seen as a relative deviation from the average level of the training data. 

Baselines. To isolate the impact of the proposed shape-gain decomposition and Equalizer methodology, we conducted parallel experiments with an ablated baseline that uses the exact same architecture, the same training dataset and training procedure, and the same bitrate configuration as the Equalizer, but without shape-gain decomposition. In this baseline, the encoder processes the raw waveform directly (i.e. without equalization) and the latent represen-tation jointly encodes amplitude and structure, as in any conventional NAC. Regarding bitrate configuration, four different values of codebook size C were tested, namely 

C = 1024 , 512 , 256 , and 128 (note that C is the size for one RVQ stage and the same value of C is used at each stage). In addition, we compare our approach against several state-of-the-art NACs, including SpeechTokenizer, DAC, and BigCodec, which serve as external reference models. Note that in the present study, we do not aim at providing a new sophisticated competing NAC with performance at the level of or beyond state-of-the-art performance. Rather, we aim to propose a general methodology easily applica-ble to any NAC, and demonstrate the potential of this methodology to increase coding performance in terms of bitrate-distortion trade-off and/or complexity reduction. 

NAC Training Set-up. To ensure a fair comparison, the baseline and the NAC within the proposed Equalizer pipe-line were trained in the same configuration, except that for The Equalizer, every utterance in the training set was equalized. All models were trained for 100 , 000 iterations using the Adam optimizer with β1 = 0 .9, β 2 = 0 .99 and an initial learning rate of 1 × 10 −4 (Kingma & Ba, 2014). We used a batch size of 16 randomly cropped audio seg-ments of 3.0 seconds. Regarding the optimization objec-tive, we adopted the standard loss configuration employed in EnCodec (Défossez et al., 2022) without modification. Specifically, the reconstruction objective combines a time-domain L1 loss with a multi-scale spectral loss consisting of L1 and L2 distances over Mel-spectrograms computed at various resolutions. This is augmented by the standard codebook commitment loss and adversarial losses. Training was distributed across 4 NVIDIA A100 GPUs. 

Equalization/Deequalization Set-Up. For the analysis-resynthesis parameters of the proposed Equalizer method, we used the Kaiser-Bessel Derived (KBD) window with parameter 

β = 4 .0 (Princen & Bradley, 2003), for both analysis and synthesis, with N = 640 , and H = 320 . This choice results from a set of pilot experiments described in details in the Appendix. 

Evaluation Metrics. We evaluated the quality of the coded speech signals using three widely adopted objective met-rics: (i) The Short-Time Objective Intelligibility (STOI) measure assesses how intelligible the resynthesized speech is (Taal et al., 2010); (ii) Perceptual Evaluation of Speech Quality (PESQ) is a measure of the perceived quality of the resynthesized speech that accounts for factors such as distortion, noise, and other artifacts (Rix et al., 2001); And (iii) the Scale-Invariant Signal-to-Distortion Ratio (SI-SDR) is defined as the power ratio between the original speech sig-nal and the resynthesis error signal (Le Roux et al., 2019); it is made invariant to a global amplitude rescaling of the signal. All three metrics are intrusive, i.e. they require the original reference speech signal. 

4.2. Results Robustness to gain variations. Figure 3 displays the objec-tive evaluation scores obtained with the proposed Equalizer 6Figure 3: Performance of the proposed Equalizer method and of the baselines, as a function of input gain α, for 4 different values of the codebook size C. Each score is averaged over ≈ 5.4 h of test signals from the Librispeech-test dataset. The proposed Equalizer method utilizing the shape-gain decomposition (solid lines) exhibits performance invariance, whereas the ablated baseline (dashed lines) degrades significantly as the gain deviates from 0 dB. Moreover, the proposed method consistently outperforms the ablated baseline even at 0 dB.  

> Figure 4: Performance of the proposed Equalizer method and of the baselines, as a function of the (total) bitrate. The scores are averaged over the entire test dataset and over a gain range of ±12 dB. The Equalizer (solid blue lines) consistently outperforms the ablated baseline (dashed orange lines) and SpeechTokenizer (purple triangle).

framework (with shape-gain decomposition), with the ab-lated baseline (without shape-gain decomposition), and with the SpeechTokenizer reference model, as a function of the input gain, and averaged over the entire test dataset. For each codebook size C tested and for each metric, the baseline model (dashed lines) exhibits a clear bell-shaped behavior: a performance peak is obtained near the training condition ( 0 dB) and degrades significantly as the input level deviates from this value, confirming the sensitivity of conventional NACs to gain variations (see Section 2). For example, for C = 1024 codewords, applying only a 6 dB gain on the input signal leads to a 0.16 decrease in PESQ value ( 2.61 to 2.45 ). In contrast, the Equalizer (solid lines) shows near-perfect invariance to gain variations, maintain-ing stable performance over the entire dynamic range. This demonstrates that the explicit shape-gain decomposition effectively removes sensitivity to the input signal global level, ensuring consistent reconstruction quality regardless of this level. Importantly, for each codebook size tested and for each metric, the proposed Equalizer method sig-7Figure 5: Impact of RVQ depth on coding quality. The scores are averaged over the entire test dataset and over a gain range of ±12 dB. 

nificantly outperforms the baseline at 0 dB, that is, even when there is no gain mismatch between train and test data. For example, again for C = 1024 , at 0 dB we obtain PESQ = 2.75 , STOI = 0.93 , and SI-SDR = 6.98 dB with the proposed Equalizer method vs PESQ = 2.61 , STOI = 

0.92 , and SI-SDR = 6.31 dB for the baseline. Other large differences are obtained for C = 128 , 256 , and 512 . This confirms the ‘general’ interest of applying early shape-gain decomposition on speech signals in a NAC framework, be-yond the induced robustness to gain variation. This gain in performance can be interpreted in terms of complexity reduction for a similar quality (the bitrate issue will be examined in the next subsection). For example, even at 

0 dB gain, The Equalizer with C = 256 codewords out-performs the baseline with C = 1024 in terms of PESQ and STOI (although it remains slightly below in terms of SI-SDR, but this is for a rather limited gain range). This shows that the proposed method can be used to drastically decrease the complexity of a NAC (here a 4× reduction factor in codeword storage and search; This example also corresponds to a significant bitrate reduction of 400 bps, see below). 

Rate-Distortion performance. The above-presented scores do not completely reflect the performance in terms of bitrate-distortion trade-off, since (i) the codebook size was not ‘translated’ into bitrate, and (ii) the proposed Equal-izer method implies separate coding of the gain and an additional corresponding bitrate. We thus now present the results as a function of the total bitrate, taking into account the gain scalar quantization for The Equalizer (vs vector VQ only for the baseline). In some more details, the RVQ has NQ = 8 stages, each with the same resolution of b = log 2(C) bits, at a rate of f = 50 vectors per second. The gain α is coded with a bα-bit μ-law (see Section 3.2), with bα = 8 . For the proposed Equalizer method, the total bitrate is thus: 

r = f · (NQ log 2(C) + bα), (9) whereas it is f · NQ · log 2(C) for the baseline. Moreover, we simulate the use of the NAC in a practical scenario where the input gain can vary in a relatively large range, and we average STOI, SI-SDR, and PESQ scores over the entire gain range tested, i.e. [−12 , 12] dB (and again over the entire test dataset). Figure 4 reports the resulting average STOI, SI-SDR, and PESQ scores as a function of bitrate. This figure shows that the proposed Equalizer method outperforms the baseline consistently and by a large margin for all bitrates. For an identical bitrate, the Equalizer achieves a substantially higher SI-SDR value compared to the baseline, e.g. 5.46 dB vs 4.40 dB at 3.2 kbps. This indicates that separating the gain and the shape vector allows the vector quantizer to use its capacity more efficiently. This also results in substantially higher PESQ and STOI scores (e.g. a PESQ score of 2.65 vs 2.25 at 3.6 kbps). Another impressive result visible in Figure 4 is that the performances of The Equalizer at 3.2 kbps ( C = 128 ) are very close to those of the baseline at 4 kbps ( C = 1024 ). This confirms that the reduction in bitrate in (each stage of) the RVQ due to the encoding of a normalized shape vector ( −1.2 kbps) largely compensates for the additional gain bitrate ( +0 .4 kbps). In this last example, this not only leads to an overall substantial decrease in bitrate of 0.8 kbps for the same coding quality ( 20% relative bitrate gain), but also to a massive reduction in complexity, with a factor 8× in codebook size (and thus codeword search). Finally, our method largely outperforms SpeechTok-enizer (purple triangle) on all metrics, demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed architecture. Here also the 8performance of The Equalizer at 3.2 kbps is similar to that of SpeechTokenizer at 4 kbps, in terms of PESQ and STOI scores; the SI-SDR score of SpeechTokenizer is limited due to the distillation of the embedding vectors with HuBERT. Note that our model and the ablated baseline were trained with about 100 h of clean speech from LibriSpeech, whereas SpeechTokenizer was trained with 960 h. 

Impact of RVQ Depth on Codebook Efficiency. So far, we have exploited the shape-gain coding efficiency by reducing the codebook size in each stage of the RVQ, compared to the baseline. Alternately, another way to reduce the bitrate is to keep the same codebook size than the baseline but reduce the RVQ depth, i.e. the number of RVQ stages NQ. We thus further analyze the efficiency of the proposed method by computing the quality metrics for NQ ∈ { 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 16 },with the codebook size C fixed to 1024. Figure 5 reports the results. Here also, all metric values are averaged over an input gain range of [−12 , 12] dB to include the robustness to input gain variations in the evaluation. As expected, increasing the number of RVQ scales im-proves the performance of both the Equalizer and the base-line. However, the proposed method consistently achieves a higher coding quality according to all metrics and for all quantization depths. Importantly, the performance gap is already significant at low bitrates, i.e. NQ = 1 and 2,where the baseline model performs poorly, likely because the limited codebook capacity must simultaneously encode both signal amplitude and spectral shape. In contrast, the Equalizer maintains substantially higher SI-SDR values. These results support our central hypothesis: explicitly decoupling gain and shape facilitates the quantization of the latent representation, allowing the RVQ to operate as an efficient “shape quantizer” and achieve higher reconstruc-tion quality per transmitted bit. At higher rates, we can see, for example, that The Equalizer with 6 RVQ scales outperforms the baseline with 8 RVQ scales for all metrics. This corresponds to a saving in bitrate of 600 bps, and, again, to a large decrease in complexity. 

5. Conclusion 

In this paper, we have presented The Equalizer, a methodology for improving the performance of neural speech/audio coders by decomposing the input signal into normalized shape, coded by an NAC, and scalar gain, sep-arately quantized with a scalar quantizer. Although this decomposition has been widely used for decades in clas-sic speech/audio codecs, to our knowledge it has not yet been proposed within a NAC framework. Importantly, the decomposition is made before the NAC encoder and the cor-responding recomposition is made after the decoder. In the present study, such equalization and deequalization are im-plemented as external modules, which can be easily applied to any state-of-the-art NAC, but they can also be applied internally on the actual vectors used as encoder input or retrieved as decoder output. Experiments have shown that The Equalizer enables a substantial improvement of the coding performance in terms of bitrate-distortion trade-off and a possibly massive reduction of the complexity of the NAC quantizer. The present study focused on the equalization and deequalization of the input/output waveforms without ex-plicitly examining the effect of the normalization on the embedding vectors. The NAC’s vector quantizer was simply retrained on the “new” embedding vectors (corresponding to the normalized encoder input) using the same struc-ture and training process as the baseline. Future work will analyze the effect of input vector normalization on the distribution of the embedding vectors and explore the use of more sophisticated VQ techniques to exploit the characteristics of this distribution, with the aim of further improving the overall Equalizer pipeline. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was granted access to the HPC resources of IDRIS under the allocation Grant 2025-A0181016041 made by GENCI. 

References 

Agustsson, E., Mentzer, F., Tschannen, M., Cavigelli, L., Timofte, R., Benini, L., & Gool, L. V. (2017). Soft-to-hard vector quantization for end-to-end learning com-pressible representations. Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , 30 .Atal, B. S., & Hanauer, S. L. (1971). Speech analysis and synthesis by linear prediction of the speech wave. 

The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America , 50 ,637–655. Benesty, J., Sondhi, M. M., Huang, Y. et al. (2008). 

Springer handbook of speech processing . Springer. Bessette, B., Salami, R., Lefebvre, R., Jelinek, M., Rotola-Pukkila, J., Vainio, J., Mikkola, H., & Jarvinen, K. (2003). The adaptive multirate wideband speech codec (AMR-WB). IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Processing , 10 , 620–636. Bosi, M., Brandenburg, K., Quackenbush, S., Fielder, L., Akagiri, K., Fuchs, H., & Dietz, M. (1997). ISO/IEC MPEG-2 advanced audio coding. Journal of the Audio Engineering Society , 45 , 789–814. Défossez, A., Copet, J., Synnaeve, G., & Adi, Y. (2022). High fidelity neural audio compression. 

arXiv:2301.01234 .Défossez, A., Mazaré, L., Orsini, M., Royer, A., Pérez, P., Jégou, H., Grave, E., & Zeghidour, N. (2024). Moshi: a speech-text foundation model for real-time dialogue. 

arXiv:2410.00037 .9Foti, P., & Brendel, A. (2025). On the design of diffusion-based neural speech codecs. arXiv:2504.08470 .Gersho, A. (2002). Optimal nonlinear interpolative vector quantization. IEEE Transactions on Communications ,

38 , 1285–1287. Gersho, A., & Gray, R. M. (1992). Vector quantization and signal compression . Kluwer Academic Publishers. Jayant, N., & Noll, P. (1985). Digital coding of waveforms. Juang, B.-H., & Gray, A. (1982). Multiple stage vector quantization for speech coding. In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing 

(pp. 597–600). Kingma, D. P., & Ba, J. (2014). Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv:1412.6980 .Kleijn, W. B., & Paliwal, K. K. (1995). Speech coding and synthesis . Elsevier Science. Kumar, R., Seetharaman, P., Luebs, A., Kumar, I., & Kumar, K. (2023). High-fidelity audio compression with improved RVQGAN. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36 .Le Roux, J., Wisdom, S., Erdogan, H., & Hershey, J. R. (2019). SDR–half-baked or well done? In IEEE In-ternational Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (pp. 626–630). Markel, J. D., & Gray, A. J. (1976). Linear prediction of speech . Springer Science. Mentzer, F., Minnen, D., Agustsson, E., & Tschannen, M. (2023). Finite scalar quantization: VQ-VAE made simple. 

arXiv:2309.15505 .Mousavi, P., Maimon, G., Moumen, A., Petermann, D., Shi, J., Wu, H., Yang, H., Kuznetsova, A., Ploujnikov, A., Marxer, R., Ramabhadran, B., Elizalde, B., Lugosch, L., Li, J., Subakan, C., Woodland, P., Kim, M., yi Lee, H., Watanabe, S., Adi, Y., & Ravanelli, M. (2025). Discrete audio tokens: More than a survey! arXiv:2506.10274 .Noll, P. (2002). MPEG digital audio coding. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine , 14 , 59–81. Oehler, K. L., & Gray, R. M. (1993). Mean-gain-shape vector quantization. In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (pp. 241– 244). Panayotov, V., Chen, G., Povey, D., & Khudanpur, S. (2015). Librispeech: an asr corpus based on public do-main audio books. In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing .Princen, J., & Bradley, A. (2003). Analysis/synthesis filter bank design based on time domain aliasing cancellation. 

IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing , 34 , 1153–1161. Rabiner, L. R., & Schafer, R. W. (2007). Introduction to digital speech processing. Foundations and Trends ® in Signal Processing , 1 , 1–194. Rix, A. W., Beerends, J. G., Hollier, M. P., & Hekstra, A. P. (2001). Perceptual evaluation of speech quality (PESQ)-a new method for speech quality assessment of telephone networks and codecs. In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing 

(pp. 749–752). Schroeder, M., & Atal, B. (1985). Code-excited linear prediction (CELP): High-quality speech at very low bit rates. In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (pp. 937–940). Spanias, A., Painter, T., & Atti, V. (2007). Audio signal processing and coding . John Wiley & Sons. Taal, C. H., Hendriks, R. C., Heusdens, R., & Jensen, J. (2010). A short-time objective intelligibility measure for time-frequency weighted noisy speech. In IEEE In-ternational Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (pp. 4214–4217). Valin, J.-M., Vos, K., & Terriberry, T. (2012). Definition of the opus audio codec . Technical Report. Van Den Oord, A., Vinyals, O. et al. (2017). Neural discrete representation learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 30 .Wu, H., Kanda, N., Eskimez, S. E., & Li, J. (2024). Ts3-codec: Transformer-based simple streaming single codec. 

arXiv:2411.18803 .Xin, D., Tan, X., Takamichi, S., & Saruwatari, H. (2024). Bigcodec: Pushing the limits of low-bitrate neural speech codec. arXiv:2409.05377 .Yang, D., Liu, S., Huang, R., Tian, J., Weng, C., & Zou, Y. (2023). Hifi-codec: Group-residual vector quantization for high fidelity audio codec. arXiv:2305.02765 .Yu, J., Li, X., Koh, J. Y., Zhang, H., Pang, R., Qin, J., Ku, A., Xu, Y., Baldridge, J., & Wu, Y. (2021). Vector-quantized image modeling with improved VQ-GAN. arXiv:2110.04627 .Zeghidour, N., Luebs, A., Omran, A., Skoglund, J., & Tagliasacchi, M. (2021). Soundstream: An end-to-end neural audio codec. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing , 30 , 495–507. Zhang, X., Zhang, D., Li, S., Zhou, Y., & Qiu, X. (2023). SpeechTokenizer: Unified speech tokenizer for speech large language models. arXiv:2308.16692 .10